---
title: "Grand Tours Data Analysis-1"
date: 2024-12-08
permalink: /posts/2024/11/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - tourde-france
  - cycling
  - data analysis
---

As an avid cyclist, I try to follow professional cycling closely, from grand
tours to one-day spring classics. Cycling inherently generates a wealth of
data, both from riders and the environments they ride. This makes it a
fascinating field to explore and practice data analysis skills. 

Grand tours like the Tour de France (TDF) and Giro d'Italia have larger
audiences and provide better databases for analysis. The official TDF
[website](https://www.letour.fr/en/) offers a database for all tours dating
back to 1903, but I find the [ProCyclingStats](https://www.procyclingstats.com)
website easier to scrape, and it also contains more detailed information.

However, the ProCyclingStats data is not quite enough by itself. For more data
about like power, segments in a stage or heart rate we need to resort to Strava
which of course doesn't cover all year (only starting from 2013 what I have
found) but way more detailed than only having stage times.

As expected, [Strava](https://www.strava.com) data is harder to obtain. First,
you need to compile a list of pro riders' Strava IDs, then retrieve the
activity IDs to scrape the available data. Unfortunately, not all professional
cyclists use Strava, and those who do often don't publish their power metrics.
However, some riders share their key metrics, providing valuable insights we
can learn from.


## The main objective

The final goal should be to predict the total and stage time for each rider
which is a ML problem that can be solved using different techniques. Moreover
considering the different categories of data one can ask different questions
that involve only statistical analysis and visualisations.

With this in mind I am listing some questions below to ensure I stay focused on
the project and don't forget anything. This list will be updated as I come up
with more questions.

## Totals

- Average speed for each year.
- Total distance and total ascent for each year.
- Which cities were visited? Pinpoint them on the map. Additionally, from the
pros' Strava uploads, we can download and analyze, map the route for each year.
- The info table scraped from procycling stats has a 'Won how' section,
checkout the distribution of finishes and their relation with the stage
attributes like distance.
- The [ProCyclingStats](https://www.procyclingstats.com) has two metrics
`profile_score` and a `startlist_quality` ? Can we define similar but better
classifiers?

## Stage-wise

- How many stages have more climbing than the average? Identify the "queen
  stage" for each year. In more detail, create a table that show the climbing rate of the stages. 
For example; given a range of climbing sth like 1000-1500 what percentage of the climbs has that over 50kms.
- How does the average speed change for each stage across different years? This
  may be connected to the riders' recovery metrics.
- How do the time gaps evolve in each stage? What factors influence these gaps,
  such as climbs, flats, or wind?
- There is a data section showing how each stage ended (e.g., sprint, solo, or
  another outcome). First, analyze the distribution, then attempt to develop a
  model that uses segments from Strava data.
- Using Strava segments data, filter for downhill or flat segments to
  investigate whether advancements in aerodynamic technology have impacted
  average speed over the years.

## Pogi-Specific Analysis

Pogi does not publish his power data on Strava. However, we can still assess
his dominance using stage time data.

- How much does Pogi deviate from the standard for each stage (or in general)?
- How do other notable riders, like Lance, Indurain, or Pantani, compare in
  terms of dominance? Compare Pogi's performance with historical winners.
- Analyze Pogi's performance in back-to-back tours.

## General Strava Analysis

- How many riders use Strava each year? This is a two-part question: some
  riders might use Strava now but didn't during earlier tours. Exploring
  historical Strava uploads could provide insights, though it may require
  significant effort.
- Can recovery day activities provide any insight into performance for the rest
  of the tour?
- What devices do riders use (e.g., Garmin, Wahoo, or others)?
- Although weather data is unavailable for older tours, it would be interesting
  to explore its potential effects on speed and power.

## Segment-Based Analysis

- How does a rider's power output (in watts) vary across different types of
stages (e.g., mountain, time trial, flat)?
- Strava's way of segmentation of a ride is not suitable for immediate ML
algorithms as there are segments that overlaps each other. With this in mind we
have to choose the segments that divides the whole ride in different ways that
minimizes the prediction errors. We can start from the selection with the
easiest algorithm i.e. **greedy** algorithm. Next we can try to partition the
ride with the longest segments, this will possibly use the dynamic programming
(guessing from the quick research I did.)
- The segments can also help for dividing the data into train/test split. It
might be better to group the segments depending on their length and grade (plus
the how late they appear in the stage) then split those as train/test groups. 

## Doping (Aliens in peloton)
- It might also be interesting the performance increase of athletes over time.
Check out if the riders that are banned and their Strava data if possible.

## Extension of the dataset and long-term plans
When predicting race outcomes, it is evident that an athlete's training before
the event is a key determinant of success. Currently, our dataset only includes
data from Grand Tour race days. A logical next step is to incorporate training
data, which is less commonly available compared to race-day records. Riders
typically choose to upload their race data, which can still provide valuable
insights. Expanding the dataset to include training sessions would enhance
predictive accuracy and offer a more comprehensive understanding of performance
factors.


